---
layout: post
title:  "Learning Can't Kill You"
date:   2020-12-30
---

I've never been someone who likes change very much. I don't know that anyone
does, but in the past I have shown an unhealthy resistance to it. My
stubbornness is strongest on the minute and hour scales. If I'm involved with
something, I'm unlikely to want to switch over to something else. I guess my
brain assigns more value to whatever I'm doing at the moment than to whatever I
could be doing instead.

But the frustrating part is that I almost always end up feeling fine or even
good once I switch. The same goes for social interaction. I generally resist
meeting people or "just chatting", but once I'm in the mix I usually have fun.
It's just that initial activation energy that I struggle with. I noticed this
personal flaw some years ago, and I've worked to overcome and correct it.

## Bait and `switch`

I started a new job the same week the pandemic lockdowns began in my area back
in March. It's a software engineering position, and I'm doubly grateful for it:
I was already desperate to switch to my dream career before the pandemic, and
now I feel lucky to have retained my position throughout. Many other people are
not as lucky as me.

The job description for my position listed Python and C as requirements. And
that made sense for me, since Python was my first love and is still my strongest
language. My technical interview even focused on Python, and the initial
training I took on the job was a refresher in Python and C. But then somewhere
along the way someone told me I was going to work with one of the Web teams
instead. Something to do with React and TypeScript, whatever that is.

I finished up my training, and as soon as I landed my last task my team
congratulated me before tossing me down the well called React. I lived in
confusion for about three months. Confusion was what I breathed. Why this, and
how do I that? What's this syntax, and where are the docs for those? It was all
new, all interesting, all struggle, all exhausting. My part of our standup
meetings became a general question period about our stack.

I learned and improved, but after three months I was getting worried. What if
I'm not learning fast enough? I started to believe that someone was going to
pull me aside one day and tell me that this "wasn't a good fit". That I should
go back to whatever I was doing before. That I was failing.

But that didn't happen. In fact, I pushed through and became a legitimate
contributor on my team. I didn't even have an intermediate knowledge of the
technology, but that wasn't my goal. I just wanted to be competent, and that's
what I accomplished. I'd even become a halfway-decent frontend developer, having
no previous frontend experience. Looking back, I wasn't ever in any real danger
of getting fired for incompetence. My brain has a way of seeing itself only
negatively.

I was proud to have completed something that I wouldn't have chosen to do
myself. But this experience was about more than some knowledge of frontend
engineering. I figured out in this period that learning can't kill me. Even if
the company fired me because I wasn't catching on fast enough, I'd still have
learned something, and I'd still be alive.

## Don't Get Too Comfortable

I could have continued on that team working on Web frontend tech for a long
time. After all, I'd climbed to the top of the first foothill near this mountain
of knowledge, with more than a little help from the friendly experts on my team.
I'd spent six months on React, and I bet if I spent another sixty I'd achieve a
modest level of mastery. But the best lesson I learned was that there are many,
many more mountains and foothills to explore, and that none of them are that
dangerous. That's why, when a request for interest in a new internal research
project came up in my email, I put my name in the same day. It was for an
unrelated problem with no clear solution and a likely unfamiliar tech stack.
*Perfect*, I thought, *a new mountain.*

Learning can't kill you, so there's no reason not to do it almost all the time.
An easy mistake is to reach competence in an area and then never leave for fear
of the pain of confusion and looking uncertain. I resist change, but that way
lies [expert beginnerism][0]. This other path---moving around and accepting your
confusion and uncertainty---has proven more rewarding for me. I hope to apply it
broadly in my life, not just professionally. It's easier to talk about than to
do it.

I finished watching [Chris Lattner's second appearance][1] on Lex Fridman's
podcast yesterday. Chris is a cool guy, and he's smart. Towards the end he talks
about how there are smart people everywhere. For a person to grow fast and grow
well, he says it's best to leave areas where you're smart and find places where
you're a novice. You'll find people there who are masters. As he says, smart
people love to teach. If you listen, they will give you their knowledge. The
price is a little humility and a willingness to be wrong.

That's what I found with my unexpected frontend work. In hindsight, it's what
I've found with almost everything I've done. There's almost always someone
standing on top of the foothill who knows more about the mountain than you ever
will. And the best part is that they're excited to tell you all about it. You
just have to be a little less resistant to change.

[0]: https://daedtech.com/how-developers-stop-learning-rise-of-the-expert-beginner/
[1]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nWTvXbQHwWs
