---
layout: post
title:  "Prima Facie Evidence"
date:   2020-12-14 17:55:39 -0500
---

I am not a lawyer, and this not legal advice.

When I moved to Virginia about a year and a half ago, I had already held an
interest in lockpicking for some time. It's cool to outsmart a system, and
accomplishing that in the physical world is at least as cool as doing it
digitally. But when I arrived here I knew that there were places in the world
where lockpicking was illegal or restricted. In a fit of civic pride---probably
brought on by just having moved---I decided to look up the laws in my area. To
my surprise, it seemed like it was illegal to own lockpicking tools without a
license in the state of Virginia. The map I saw with Virginia colored in orange
or red scared me off, and I didn't pursue it much after that. I read about
locksport and watched some talks on picking, but I guess I wasn't interested
enough to dig into the law and see what the deal was. I wish I had, because I
was quite wrong.

The other day I watched a [talk][0][^1] by the renowned Deviant Ollam, a
physical penetration tester and Web personality. He got me interested enough to
actually look again at the Virginia laws. I ended up on the site for The Open
Organization of Lockpickers, of which Deviant is a board member. They list all
the [lockpicking laws][1] for each state and have a map that shows where
lockpicking is legal or restricted. There are a few states[^2] where there are
restrictions or conditions, and Virginia is one of them. But it seems like the
restrictions are not that restrictive, as long as you're not trying to commit a
crime. According to TOOOL, the law is [Code of Virginia ยง 18.2-94][2],
*Possession of burglarious tools, etc.*, and it reads:

>If any person have in his possession any tools, implements or outfit, with
>intent to commit burglary, robbery or larceny, upon conviction thereof he shall
>be guilty of a Class 5 felony. The possession of such burglarious tools,
>implements or outfit by any person other than a licensed dealer, shall be prima
>facie evidence of an intent to commit burglary, robbery or larceny.

That sounds bad. But actually it's not, as long as you're not trying to "commit
burglary, robbery, or larceny." It all hangs on that phrase *prima facie
evidence*. It's "a Latin expression", says the [Wikipedia page][3], and it
roughly means "on its first encounter" or "at first sight." As far as I'm aware,
a traditional court considers the defendant to be innocent until the prosecution
can prove otherwise. This law seems to say that the defendant's possession of
these tools flips the assumption around. Once the prosecution establishes the
defendant's possession, it's on the defense to prove that there wasn't any
intent to commit.

But if you aren't actually doing anything criminal, then it should be easy
enough to prove that that's the case[^3]. And that's great for me, because I
don't intend to rob anyone, so for me this is hardly a restriction at all. Sure,
it's not great, because I'd still be at risk if I bought some lockpicking
equipment and then something legal ever happened to me. But I like my chances.

[^1]: The talk was about a key duplication. The idea is to collect enough information from a key to recreate it later, since information is light and easy to hide. Often it's as simple as taking a well-lit photo of the key, although there are more involved processes like taking a clay mold. It works because lockset manufacturers use standard dimensions for their keys. That simplifies the problem from continuous measurement to digital classification. Since these dimensions (bitting values) describe and encode the key, they're as good as the key itself. All you have to do is manufacture a new key according to the specification you collected.

[^2]: Mississippi, Nevada, Ohio, Tennessee, and Virginia

[^3]: Assuming a fair justice system, which is often a bad assumption.

[0]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AayXf5aRFTI

[1]: https://toool.us/laws.html

[2]: https://law.lis.virginia.gov/vacode/title18.2/chapter5/section18.2-94/

[3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prima_facie
