---
layout: post
title:  "Not a Quant Fan"
date:   2020-12-08 20:24:30 -0500
---

Another Bitcoin bubble seems fit to burst. For me, that means it's time to slog
through another one of my annual-or-so crypto benders. Usually these consist of
imagining what it would be like to be any good at designing high-frequency
trading systems. Then, after several hours or days of writing hasty Python, I
give up and return to society. It would be cool to be good at it, because it
seems like a... well, it's not a *good* way to make money, but if you're
successful at it then it's an *effective* way to make money. It draws me in
because it seems like if you're smart enough, then you can print cash. Keyword
"seems". You can also frame the task as exploiting the market system, which
makes it a little like hacking, and that's doubly cool to some parts of my
brain. All you have to do is be smarter than everyone around you, and I sure do
pretend to be that sometimes.

I've gotten a little smarter over the years. I don't put real money into my
patchwork systems anymore---an expensive mistake I only made three or four
times---and with each cycle I find I spend less time chasing a solution before
giving up. But this time I felt something different. When I'm "researching" at
the beginning of these dives, usually I'm excited and I feel a bit sneaky. I
don't think so much about what I'm really doing, or whether it has any value or
use in the world.

This time I did. While I did my "research", I realized that I don't think that
quantitative finance has any true value in the world. I guess it can help some
people retire early, and that's something. But mostly it seems like quantitative
engineers are after profit ("alpha") in a way that isn't malicious but also
isn't self-reflective. They're hackers, people who are trying to notice what
others don't and turn it into profit. And in a way I admire that, except that
they're not really building anything. They're doing research, sure, but what is
it good for?

I imagined what the success state would be for this kind of thing. Suppose I was
successful and built a fantastic Bitcoin trading bot that was smarter than the
rest. And then suppose I used that bot to make a pile of money into a somewhat
larger pile of money. Would that make me feel good? In my imagination, it didn't
seem like it. (Maybe if I really did it I would feel differently.) I realized
that I would have preferred to spend my time learning something different,
something that I could feel good for having done it. Even in the ideal case, it
would take me hundreds of hours to learn enough quantitative finance to build
something novel, or even functional. What else could I do with that time? I'd
never considered that before on these benders, but once I did I had no desire to
continue.

I don't think my morality is important to anyone except me. And I don't think
quantitative engineers are heartless automatons who will make puppy souffle for
an extra 0.1% ROI. From what I can tell many quants are happy, self-actualizing
data nerds. It did surprise me, though, that I had this new reaction to the
idea. For lack of a better explanation, I'm counting this as an improvement to
my character.

But I don't think that'll stop me from continuing this cycle in the future, at
least until my brain hardens some more.
